Journal of Marketing Management
ISSN: 0267-257X (Print) 1472-1376 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjmm20
Local Campaign Management: Winning Votes or
Wasting Resources?
Darren G. Lilleker
To cite this article: Darren G. Lilleker (2005) Local Campaign Management: Winning
Votes or Wasting Resources?, Journal of Marketing Management, 21:9-10, 979-1003, DOI:
10.1362/026725705775194166
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1362/026725705775194166
Published online: 01 Feb 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 191
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjmm20
Journal of Marketing Management 2005, 21, 979-1003 
ISSN1472-1376/2005/9-10/00979 + 24  £8.00/0 
©Westburn Publishers Ltd. 
 
Darren G. 
Lilleker1 
Local Campaign Management: 
Winning Votes or Wasting Resources? 
Bournemouth University 
 
Current debates within studies of election campaign 
management focus on the extent to which the process 
has evolved, becoming more centrally-orchestrated and 
professional, over the last two decades. The normative 
account is that election campaigns focus on news 
management and elevate the status of party leaders; 
mediatised 
pseudo-events 
have 
replaced 
direct 
interaction 
with 
the 
voter. 
However 
marketing 
literature, as well as work on local campaigning, 
suggests an alternative model is more successful for 
electoral systems such as the UK. This promotes a more 
disparate set of individually tailored campaigns focusing 
on issues relevant to constituencies. In 2005 it seems 
that parties were promoting this more localised 
approach, however do voters value this more postmodern 
approach, or is it the national campaign that counts. 
Research 
among 
voters 
within 
three 
marginal 
constituencies finds that both national and local factors 
are influential upon voter behaviour; furthermore 
however, a not insignificant group of voters make their 
choice based on the service provision of their local 
representative.  
 
 
Keywords:  election, campaigning, constituency service, party politics 
 
Introduction 
 
Studies of developments in political campaigning over the last two decades 
note marked changes in the way that elections are managed. It appears now 
to be the normative view that campaigns are highly strategic and 
coordinated affairs under the control of small cadres at the top of party 
structures (Dylan and Griffiths 2001; Wring 2004). These campaign teams 
will rely heavily on the advise of consultants, often from the commercial 
sector, who will be embedded within the coordinating body (Plasser and 
Plasser 2002; Wring 1999); use extensive market intelligence to design the 
                                                     
1 Correspondence: Bournemouth Media School, Bournemouth University, Fern 
Barrow, Poole, BH12 5BB, Tel: 01202 965622, Email: dlilleker@bmth.ac.uk  
 
980 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
campaign (Acton and Lilleker 2004; Lees-Marshment 2001); seek to control 
the national media agenda in order to receive favourable publicity (Jones 
1996; 2001a; 2001b; Sanders et al. 1999); and attempt to transmit their 
messages to key groups in society, those whose support the campaign team 
has identified will be crucial for the parties electoral success (Panebianco 
1988; Gould 1997; Bannon 2003). These features are described as central to the 
third age of campaigning (Blumler and Kavanagh 1999) or  the campaign of 
the postmodern era (Norris 2000) and feature in many of the debates 
surrounding the professionalisation of campaigning (Mair et al. 2004; 
Mancini 1999; Negrine and Lilleker 2003; Swanson and Mancini 1996) and 
the extent to which global trends match those synonymous with an American 
style of campaigning (Holtz-Bacha 2002; Negrine and Papathanassopoulos 
1996; Mair et al. 2004).  
Cutting across the discussion of the professionalisation and centralisation 
of campaign management in the UK is the argument that such developments 
can be counter productive (Lilleker and Negrine 2003; Negrine and Lilleker 
2003) and that actually it is the strength and relevance of local campaigning 
that has the propensity to mobilise voters as well as having some role in 
persuading local electorates to support one candidate over another (Denver 
and Hands 1997; Denver et al. 2003; Johnston and Pattie 2003; Pattie and 
Johnston 2003). This is due to UK elections having two parallel components, 
a national campaign fought out between party leaders and a series of 646 
local campaigns between local candidates and parties. While it is argued that 
the majority of voters focus purely on the national election, and who should 
be prime minister, the evidence suggesting that local campaigning has an 
effect (Denver and Hands 1997) and that sitting members of parliament can 
earn a personal vote (Cain et al. 1987) counters this normative view of voter 
behaviour. This research disentangles these two influences on voting 
behaviour, the local and national, seeking to explain the extent to which local 
campaigns and the candidates matter to individuals when making their 
choice at the ballot box. Following a discussion of the evidence surrounding 
the importance of local factors on voting, the paper will offer an introduction 
to the party strategies nationally and in the following section contrast that 
with an analysis of the local campaigns within three marginal seats in Dorset 
UK, each held by one of the major three UK political parties contending the 
2005 General Election. The final section will assess what effect the local 
campaign had and whether local activity is effective in mobilising and 
persuading voters or if it is simply a waste of time and resources.  
 
All Politics is Local? The Localisation of Campaigning 
 
It is difficult to contest the accuracy of claims that campaigning has become 
 
Local Campaign Management 
981 
 
centralised and a more professional affair. It is possible to contest what is 
meant by the term professional (Lilleker and Negrine 2002), but not that 
campaigning has changed fundamentally in a number of important ways. 
Any text covering the future of marketing communications, which is not 
largely dissimilar from political campaign communications, tells of key 
challenges that force campaign professionals to rethink their behaviour. In no 
particular order of importance or their temporal arrival these are the 
fragmentation and increasing assertiveness of the consumer in a commercial 
as well as a political context; the fragmentation of media and rise of new 
technological communication challenges; and the increasing globalisation 
and localisation of culture and identity. These trends mean that consumers 
and voters are becoming harder to reach but even harder to mobilise and 
persuade; messages need to be carefully constructed, innovative and targeted 
at individual’s real identities, as opposed to mass marketing to perceived 
homogenous groups. Debates surrounding these issues are prevalent in 
modern marketing and management literature (for example see Gabriel and 
Lang 1999), politics remains some way behind yet faces similar challenges 
and questions (Lees-Marshment and Lilleker 2005). Yet central to marketing 
theory is the concept of targeting the individual not the mass, suggesting a 
localisation of campaigning in a political context. 
Marketing informs us that consumers like to be treated as being 
postmodern, they like their own identity to be reinforced, which may well 
relate to their perceived community. They like to be communicated ‘with’ 
rather than ‘to’ in a way that means their individuality is recognised and 
their issues addressed (Jackson and Lilleker 2004); this can also mean that 
they desire communication relevant to their ‘community’, be that defined in 
terms of race, gender, geography, age or whatever is deemed an important 
point of personal reference by the individual. Equally the consumer desires 
communication about the issues that concern them and tend not to process 
that which is irrelevant. Politics, despite narrowcasting tailored messages, 
largely employs the mass communication of catch-all and often bland 
promises despite evidence suggesting that the opposite is a more successful 
means for interaction. However in the lead up to the General Election of 
2005, parties were suggesting a more individualistic and tailored form of 
communication centring on the local and not the national. This did not mean 
an abandonment of national campaigning, but that local activities would not 
necessarily be intrinsically dependent on their national counterpart.  
Developing from a study of campaigning at the local level, Lilleker and 
Negrine (2003) argued that candidates themselves felt they were better 
placed to design and administer their campaign than those at party 
headquarters. Many posited that the ‘one size fits all’ or Mandelsonian model 
of campaigning, named after New Labour strategist and MP Peter 
982 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Mandelson (Bartle and Griffiths 2001), featuring strict news management and 
rapid rebuttal of opponent attacks, turns off the voters. Furthermore the 
central offices’ rigid control over political communication means that a 
candidate cannot develop a personalised and locally relevant campaign.  
It was argued that UK voters did not like it when candidates or their 
representatives met them but only reproduced the party mantra, like ‘speak 
your weight machines’, rather than tailoring messages to the locality or the 
individual (Lilleker and Negrine 2003). The arguments of candidates at the 
2001 General Election, who felt constrained by their constituency parties or 
the national strategy, argued they were unable to produce an effective 
campaign that would be relevant to the people they were offering to 
represent. Party strategies such as ‘policy days’, when each constituency 
party held an event highlighting one area of the manifesto as part of a news 
management strategy, were claimed to be popular with journalists but fell 
flat among voters. Voters desire to engage with the candidates, but on their 
terms and about the policies important to them, it was claimed.  These 
opinions appear to be reinforced by the findings of the British Election 
Survey which argued the importance of salience in terms of messages being 
received, processed and accepted (Clarke et al. 2004).  
The centralisation of campaigning is perhaps appropriate for political 
systems where there is little link between voting and local representation. 
Under 
proportional 
representation 
votes 
are 
cast 
solely 
to 
gain 
representation within national political legislatures. However in the UK the 
vote is cast primarily for a local representative. This does not mean that the 
representative is selected for any other reason than the party they stand on 
behalf of, but there is a sense that the strength of the local campaign as well 
as the relevance of messages is of importance to local voters (Denver and 
Hands 1997). Equally, due to the zero-sum nature of UK elections, supporters 
of one party may be unable to influence the outcome of the election if they 
cast it for that party; this is because that party has insufficient support within 
the voting region to have any chance of winning. Parties thus try to gather 
the support of these voters, as well as the ‘undecideds’, through local 
campaigning. This means that centralisation can be argued to be anathema to 
the context of UK elections; however it was argued by candidates who stood 
in 1997 and 2001 that that process was occurring and prevented them from 
offering themselves as constituency representatives.  
The demands of the post-modern voter and the peculiarity of the UK 
electoral context produces a high degree of regional and local disparity in 
terms of support for parties and the marginality of the local contests. Thus as 
Tim Hames wrote in The Times “The pattern in particular seats varies much 
more randomly and starkly so that to speak of a national swing is no longer 
really accurate” (2005, p. 60; see also Baines and Mortimore 2005). Hames 
 
Local Campaign Management 
983 
 
describes the situation where Labour can safely win in their most marginal 
seat, Dorset South, while losing a swathe of numerically safe seats such as 
Enfield Southgate to the Conservatives. The Liberal Democrats are returned 
in some areas with increased majorities, can beat Labour in heartland 
constituencies like Manchester Withington (where a Labour majority of 
11,524 votes was swept away), but still cannot hold off the Conservatives in 
Guildford. This suggests that there is much to play for at the local level and 
thus local campaign management is a highly important component of 
modern campaigning, something that campaign strategists appear to be alert 
to.  
Suggestions of a shift away from centralisation were first aired at a panel 
at the Elections, Parties and Opinion Polls Conference held in September 
2004. Labour’s Head of Political Strategy Greg Cook and his then 
Conservative counterpart Dominic Schofield both argued that the campaign 
must be focused more at the local level, there were even hints of some degree 
of separation between the two levels of campaigning. David Evans, former 
assistant general secretary of the Labour party speaking at a Conference in 
February 2005, argued the party had become out of touch with the 
communities it represented; partially talking of Labour loyalists but also 
hinting at making the campaign relevant. Such comments were reinforced by 
Will Harris, Conservative Director of Marketing 2003-4, speaking at the same 
event. He argued that politics must be bottom up and that campaigning must 
reflect that. Tony Blair himself, speaking at a briefing at Labour’s 
headquarters in February 2005, instructed candidates that face-to-face contact 
with the voters would be vital to “inspire, enthuse and engage and give the 
public a sense of empowerment” (BBC News www.bbc.co.uk/news/ 
1/hi/uk_politics/4272741.stm accessed 17 February 2005). Such comments 
set the scene for a sea change in campaigning at the 2005 General Election, 
this paper seeks to identify to what extent this change materialised and to 
what effect.  
 
Methodology 
 
Campaigns took place in 646 constituencies, however their intensity was 
governed by the marginality of the contest locally. In the marginal seats 
campaigns receive significantly higher resources and it would be expected, 
as a result of the resource input, central control would be tighter. Three 
campaigns were examined, those of the incumbents in three marginal seats: 
Dorset Mid, Dorset West and Dorset South, each one held by one of the three 
major parties: the Liberal Democrats, Conservatives and Labour respectively.  
Dorset Mid was held by backbench Liberal Democrat MP Annette Brooke 
with a majority of 384 votes. Brooke defeated the Conservative incumbent 
Christopher Fraser in 2001, the first time that this seat, divided as it is 
984 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
between urban conurbation and rural Dorset, private and social housing, had 
elected a non-Conservative representative. Brooke as a former mayor of 
Poole and local school governor capitalises on her local identity and her track 
record as an active, hard working politician. It was these qualities that her 
2005 Conservative opponent, Simon Hayes, tried to undermine; attempting 
to sell himself as a local man despite having moved to the constituency just 
prior to the campaign. His campaign was largely negative, attacking the 
Liberal Democrats policies on sentencing criminals, Europe and immigration. 
Dorset West is the seat of Conservative Shadow Chancellor Oliver Letwin, 
a staunchly Conservative seat, constituting mainly rural areas that grace 
many postcards. However Letwin has seen an increasingly strong challenge 
from the Liberal Democrats, who have taken control of Dorchester town 
council and reduced his parliamentary majority to just 1,414 in 2001. Letwin 
was clearly a target in the Liberal Democrats’ well publicised decapitation 
strategy, an attempt to assert themselves as ‘the real opposition’ by defeating 
key members of the Conservative shadow cabinet. His opponent, Liberal 
Democrat Justine McGuinness, had earned a high profile in Dorchester town 
and had presented herself at all times as a viable alternative MP since her 
acceptance of the candidature in 2003. Thus the fight between the two main 
combatants was on their ability to represent the area and party politics was 
largely eschewed.  
Dorset South was Labour’s most marginal seat. The MP, backbencher Jim 
Knight, defeated Conservative Ian Bruce at his second attempt in 2001 by 153 
votes. The swing some attribute to the loss of jobs at the naval base, which 
Bruce failed to defend, though the closures were the result of Labour 
government policy. The seat contains affluent rural areas, but the majority of 
voters live in the towns of Swanage and Weymouth which demographically 
fit an Old Labour profile. While the seat was expected to fall, given the polls 
showing a swing from Labour to Conservatives, Labour leader and prime 
minister Tony Blair gave Knight the ultimate boost of appearing in the 
constituency on the day of the election being called; an appearance that 
launched the contest in the local paper the Daily Echo. Perhaps of most 
benefit to the Knight campaign, however, was the ‘accident prone’ campaign 
of his rival: Conservative Ed Matts. His doctoring of photos supporting a 
family seeking asylum and further inaccurate claims led him to make three 
public apologies to the voters, to Olympic gold medallists he had used on 
campaign literature without permission, and to Knight himself; thus his 
reputation became tarnished locally.  
The rationale for choosing these seats is that within marginal seats 
campaigns are of a far higher intensity than elsewhere, they enjoy far higher 
resourcing from the national parties; equally they would be expected to come 
under greater control than seats that are considered safe. This would mean 
 
Local Campaign Management 
985 
 
that 
the 
campaign 
management 
should 
evidence 
aspects 
of 
the 
professionalised model, and that due to the intensity the effects upon voter 
behaviour should be clearer.  In terms of interest and convenience, they are 
also three of the most marginal seats of the major parties in close proximity, 
so aiding contact with the campaign teams locally and observation of the 
strategy as it unfolded. Furthermore, and perhaps against the odds, all three 
campaigns were successful with the incumbents being returned with higher 
majorities. A key question is to what extent incumbency played a role.  
Throughout the campaign each office was visited in order to gain a feel for 
the campaign, its organisation and the strategy locally. Face-to-face 
interviews with party strategists and the candidates took place after the 
election2, allowing the opportunity to reflect on the strategy, the successes 
and failures and to provide a view of how the campaign fitted with the 
professional model. There was also contact with representatives of the 
party’s national strategy teams via email and telephone to gain further 
information about campaign strategy generally.3 In order to assess the 
effectiveness of the campaigns, questionnaires were posted to 3,000 voters 
chosen randomly from a sample of demographically-identified key voter 
groups; the response rate was 32%, a total of 966.  A breakdown of the 
sample is provided in Table 1. The questionnaires were also used to recruit 
volunteers for focus groups. Two in each constituency were held during June 
2005 to gain some qualitative insights into voter opinions of campaigning 
and its influence over their decision making.  
The respondents were, obviously self-selecting, and the focus group 
participants were volunteers. While the latter cannot be viewed as reliable 
above offering these voters’ personal insights into the campaign, the 
questionnaire respondents match the overall demographics of the 
constituency within acceptable levels and the data suggests that, while it is 
interesting, these respondents are not necessarily unusual in any specific way 
and their opinions and influences should map on to the ordinary voter 
within other marginal seats within the UK.  
 
 
                                                     
2 Interviews were conducted with Annette Brooke MP, Lin Hudswell (Brooke’s 
Campaign Manager) and David Budd (Councillor and Leader of Dorset Liberal 
Democrats); Antony Stanley (Letwin’s Campaign Agent) and Stephen Frey (Dorset 
West Constituency Association); and Jim Knight MP, Kay Wilcox (Knight’s 
Campaign Agent) and Gareth Thomas (Chair of Dorset South Constituency Labour 
Party).  
3 Informal discussions and more formal interviews were carried out with 
representatives of all three national party’s strategy teams, due to participants 
requests these are anonymised. 
986 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Table 1. Demographic Profile of Respondents 
 
 
Vote 2001 % 
Vote 2005 % 
Age  %  * 
Gender %  ** 
 
Sample 
Actual† 
Sample 
Actual† 
Sample 
Actual Sample 
Actual 
Dorset 
Mid and 
Poole 
North 
 
N = 276 
Con  35 
Lab   12 
LD    39 
Other  3 
None   9 
41.1 
15.5 
42.0 
  1.4 
Con  35 
Lab   10 
LD    49 
Other  3 
None   3 
36.6 
11.6 
48.7 
  3.1 
18-30  25 
31-50  33 
50+     42 
25 
32 
42 
M 50 
F  50 
48 
52 
Dorset 
South 
 
N = 336 
Con    32 
Lab    44 
LD     13 
Other   3 
None  13 
41.6 
42.0 
14.4 
  2.0 
Con    37 
Lab    41 
LD     17 
Other   3 
None    2 
37.9 
41.6 
15.7 
  4.8 
18-30  36 
31-50  32 
50+     32 
25 
31 
44 
M  45 
F   55 
46 
54 
Dorset 
West 
 
N = 339 
Con    35 
Lab    21 
LD     42 
Other   3 
None   9 
44.6 
13.6 
41.8 
Con   42 
Lab   10 
LD    42 
Other  4 
None   2 
46.5 
  7.8 
41.9 
  3.8 
18-30  34 
31-50  30 
50+     36 
28 
36 
40 
M 45 
F  55 
44 
56 
N = 966 
* Derived from local council data 
** Derived from Census 2001: Report for Parliamentary Constituencies, The Stationery Office 
2002. 
† 100% of actual voters only, non-voters cannot be factored in. 
 
Party Strategies: The Centralised Campaign  
 
Few commentators or pollsters would have predicted Labour losing the 2005 
General Election, the safe bet was that the party would be returned to power 
with a reduced majority. Yet, as soon as journalists saw an election on the 
horizon, the closeness of the result was being talked up. Any shift in the polls 
towards the Conservatives was exaggerated, despite their endemic margin of 
error, and this seemed to dominate the two major party’s strategy. From the 
very beginning Labour appeared to be afraid that the Conservatives could 
pull off a victory, thus their strategy was to get out their vote. Alongside the 
daily media-led pseudo events, often enforcing the image of unity between 
Blair and Brown, the party used  ten separate paid-for mailouts to convince 
voters of the achievements of Labour since 1997, that the leadership 
recognised there was ‘more work to do’ and that they were the best choice 
for government. Letters from Brown talked up Tony Blair, encouraging the 
public to trust him, while a less formal letter from Deputy Prime Minister 
John Prescott detailed the dangers of not registering a vote for the 
government and ‘waking up with Michael Howard’. The letters were 
targeted chiefly at Labour supporters disillusioned with Blair in the 
aftermath of the Iraq war and subsequent Hutton Inquiry, but who were 
 
Local Campaign Management 
987 
 
unlikely to vote for Howard and so could either vote for a minority party 
that had little chance of winning or abstain from voting altogether. The 
voters targeted were chosen using state of the art direct marketing Experian 
mosaic software that employs demographics to calculate consumer and now 
voter behaviour. The party’s plans were set out in Forward, Not Back, the 
manifesto which reinforced the perception of a party having achieved much 
of their programme in the previous terms but equally determined to be 
proactive in their third term of office. 
Labour’s nervousness has been attributed to the Conservative’s attack 
strategy that began in advance of the election being called (Smith 2005). The 
Conservatives offered themselves as a party listening to the public using six 
statements that were expressions of important issues. These were cemented 
together with the slogan ‘Are you thinking what we’re thinking?’. However 
the Conservative campaign was one of the most negative the UK has seen, 
while all three parties displayed a flair for going negative, and between 
March 21 and April 1 over 75% of all party’s press releases contained 
negative messages (see www.cx-i/online_politics/negative_campaigning), 
the Conservatives appeared to lead more often on a negative argument.  This 
is the nature of oppositional politics, and of being in opposition; however 
attacks on Labour’s record, as well as on Liberal Democrat policies were sent 
out within constituencies that pitted Conservatives against one of the others 
in a close fight. These messages were targeted using Voter Vault which, 
similar to Experian Mosaic, works on the principle that “if you know what 
people’s social characteristics are, it is not difficult to identify how they will 
vote” (Conservative leader Michael Howard quoted in Watt and Borger 
2005). Beyond this the party was occupied in a high level media war with 
Labour to get the upper hand on a range of issues, predominantly plans for 
state welfare provision, and its funding, immigration and the issue of trust. 
The Conservatives were keen to undermine public confidence in Blair and 
repeatedly called him a liar in leaflets, broadcasts and statements.  
The least negative party are usually the Liberal Democrats; however they 
were equally keen to attack the record of Blair, particularly over the Iraq 
War. However their communication largely accentuated their reform of the 
tax system, particularly the replacement of Council Tax with a Local Income 
Tax, and the scrapping of tuition fees for university students. Unlike the 
Conservatives, the record will show that their economic proposals did add 
up and were independently verified; however there were several questions 
regarding who would be worse off and by how much. Liberal Democrat 
campaigns tend, however, to be more localised affairs; Kennedy was in the 
spotlight throughout, partly due to him becoming a father within the first 
week of the campaign, but largely their campaigns were local rather than 
national, though greater uniformity has been called for by the centre (Lees-
988 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Marshment and Lilleker 2005).  In terms of direct mail, they deluged the 
constituencies they were targeting, employing direct ‘hand written’ letters 
from the candidate and promoting the record of the party locally as well as 
leading on issues of relevance to a particular constituency: scrapping of 
student fees in Cardiff Central, Council Tax reform among the older 
population of Corfe Mullen and Broadstone in Dorset Mid. 
While the above details the parties’ national strategies and messages, the 
level of roll out to the local constituencies was less transparent. The party 
strategists argued that candidates would be expected to both ‘reflect the 
national message’, while also ‘showing they were part of the community’. 
The Conservatives particularly promoted using direct mail to highlight party 
policy on local issues. However it appeared that the parties were happy for 
the local political organisation to take the lead in the campaign more than 
they had in the past, with the exception of the Liberal Democrats who were 
more ambiguously talking about both centralisation and localisation without 
any clear elucidation of how these might fit together. This indicates that the 
national campaign is largely transparent and recorded within the media; it is 
at the local level that the story may be more interesting.  
 
A Home Grown Campaign: A View from the Local Parties  
 
The reflections on the use of resources showed that UK parties are aware of 
the criticisms of centralisation and have taken them seriously. Labour 
nationally, the architects of the Mandelsonian model, argue that only those 
candidates that are lazy will rely simply on the templates they supply: yet 
they supply rafts of such material. Jim Knight, Labour incumbent in Dorset 
South, observed that as a marginal seat he was given access to ‘an enormous 
amount of resources… not all of it we used… and not all of it we wanted’. 
However his campaign locally was run in the way Knight wanted and it was 
he, along with his tight-knit team, led by Knight and his agent Kay Wilcox, 
who were in control of strategy; a claim of independence made by all three of 
the local campaign teams. None saw their strategy as running counter to 
central office, and would not have wished to do so, however believed they 
were better placed to know what style of campaign and which messages 
would be most appropriate for success in the constituency in which they 
were standing.  
The Knight team argued that at times central office interventions could be 
problematic. For example visits by Cabinet members were not always useful. 
On a practical level they caused local resources to be diverted in order to 
collect the visitor and then lead them to the ‘event’, often this involved high 
security and it was the team that had to find locations for helicopters to land, 
plan routes and organise a photo opportunity. While unspoken, the Labour 
 
Local Campaign Management 
989 
 
team hinted that such efforts were not worth the benefits. One reason for this 
is the perceived negative connotations that some cabinet ministers have. 
While Knight explains his reasons for supporting the Iraq War on his website 
(www.jimknightmp.co.uk), was Blair’s visit reinforcing Knight’s link to a 
prime minister branded a liar a useful public relations event, given the local 
campaign was to elect ‘Just Jim’ a good local representative; the team hinted 
such attachments were not always useful. The Conservatives had far fewer 
visits, and could not comment on the reason but stated they were ‘very 
useful’; the Liberal Democrats in Dorset Mid were visited by Kennedy, 
Baroness Williams, and a number of high profile party members not known 
to the wider public. An in–house video capturing the high points of the 
Brooke campaign records that though visits were useful to gain media 
attention, largely they provided morale boosts for campaign volunteers.  
For the two major parties, however, the key problem was that two 
campaigns were running parallel, and at times counter, to one another. The 
national campaign within Dorset South involved a lot of direct mail, ten 
individual pieces, which was then backed up with phone calls from the call 
centre in Tyneside. The fear within the Knight team was that the national 
campaign within Dorset South would annoy voters and put them off; his 
campaign was very personal and focused on local achievements that linked 
to government policy. Knight and his team argued that the highly 
personalised and locally focused campaign was the best for the constituency. 
Hence all communication placed him centre-stage as the product, and often 
simply as ‘Jim’, as opposed to Jim Knight MP: as per the slogan ‘If you value 
him, vote for Jim’. Leaflets and his DVD promoted personal campaigns, for 
example him spearheading a road safety scheme that earned him the title 
Road Safety Parliamentarian of the Year. Knight also repeatedly reminded 
Dorset South voters that he had dealt with 5,953 constituent cases since his 
election in 2001. He argued that his high degree of activism had built him a 
profile locally meaning he had a relationship with his electorate; hence the 
product was ‘Just Jim’. Knight argued he had ‘earned the permission to 
contact them’. He recognised the public’s general dissatisfaction with junk 
mail and cold-calling, based probably on his past career as a salesman for 
Yellow Pages, so saw lesser value in the party direct communication strategy. 
Due to his service provision he felt that voters would be more interested in 
mail from him, someone they knew, than an anonymous party machine.  
The Conservatives in Dorset West hinted that they faced a similar 
situation, but were less concerned about inconsistencies between national 
and local messages. They found the centrally produced attacks against their 
opponents, the Liberal Democrats, highly useful; though they were also more 
focused on selling their incumbent Oliver Letwin as the local representative 
and attempted to steer the campaign away from overt negativity.  The 
990 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
problem here is that the party uses its free direct mail to each voter to send 
the messages set out by the central office strategy teams. Locally the message 
is set by the candidate and their team, the fear was that voters received 
conflicting messages which are perceived to be from the same source. 
Indeed, the lack of synergy between the parallel campaigns was argued by 
some voters to be confusing. One voter noted “I was coming to like the MP 
then I got this stuff on immigration through the door, that reminded me why 
I couldn’t vote for [Letwin]” (Focus Group, Dorset West, 27/06/05). This is 
something that Knight was also aware of and concerned about, though there 
was no evidence that Labour central office flyers or phone calls had turned 
any voters away from his campaign.  
The Conservative and Liberal Democrat both received daily bulletins, in 
the Conservatives case sent out by Lynton Crosby. Dorset West agent 
Antony Stanley argued these were useful and some could be cut and pasted 
into a leaflet, but largely they were irrelevant to the kind of campaign that, he 
in consultation with Letwin, deemed appropriate. Letwin was happy to lay 
out the party pledges, however the majority of his communication focused 
on personal achievements over the last twelve months as well as his personal 
pledge to the constituency. The last paragraph of his ‘handwritten letter’, 
distributed during the last week of the campaign among weak Labour and 
Liberal Democrat supporters read: ‘For the last eight years, I have tried to do 
a conscientious job as your MP. I hope you feel that I have done the job 
properly. I hope you will give me a chance to continue that work…’. The 
note does refer to the election of a ‘government that takes action to serve and 
support the hardworking majority that has too often been forgotten by Mr 
Blair’; yet the party is not named and the focus is predominantly Letwin. 
High visibility was also key, as one senior Conservative advisor noted with 
annoyance given Letwin was needed to be publicly defending Conservative 
economic proposals. Letwin ensured he was seen throughout the large 
constituency throughout the campaign, including trying to penetrate the 
Liberal Democrat stronghold of Dorchester. Visibility was not targeted to key 
groups in geographic areas, but designed to reach the majority of voters 
independent of potential voting behaviour. 
Dorset Mid’s Liberal Democrat incumbent largely agreed with this 
strategy. Brooke’s was another campaign that was locally focused and 
references to party policy were secondary to the promotion of Brooke as a 
hard working, local MP. Though the Liberal Democrats attacked and counter 
attacked the Conservative’s policies and communication, and promoted 
many of the party’s key policy themes, the key message was that Brooke was 
a local person working for the community. This is encapsulated in a sentence 
from her letter to potential Labour voters: ‘please remember my fight is not 
against other parties – it is for our area and everyone who lives here’. Glossy 
 
Local Campaign Management 
991 
 
leaflets showed her to be highly active within parliament and the 
constituency enforcing the message of an active representative, the link to the 
party was only made when arguing that as the Liberal Democrats increase 
their number of seats, as was expected, then Brooke herself would have ‘an 
even stronger voice in Parliament to effect the change you want’. 
Appropriateness was determined through market intelligence, though not 
of the nature described in campaign texts. Though the national messages 
may well be simple heuristics created from qualitative research carried out 
by the party strategists, locally it appears that knowledge ‘from the streets’ is 
of more use. This meant talking to voters in surgeries, at meetings and on the 
doorsteps, discovering what issues affected them and their community. For 
some Dorset Mid voters, for example, it was council tax reform that was a 
key issue, a central plank of Liberal Democrat policy; similarly some Dorset 
West voters wanted to talk of the problems of immigration and the 
cleanliness of hospitals, all key Conservative manifesto issues; but across the 
three constituencies there were also post office closures, public transport 
problems and a range of non-party political issues that candidates were 
expected to respond on. These micro political issues were often highlighted 
in communication, Letwin’s campaign for a flood warden at Bridport’s West 
Bay, Knight’s road safety campaign and Brooke’s victory to gain funding for 
a school in the rural area of Lytchett Minster are all examples. All the 
candidates argued that the national messages were useful in synthesising the 
core reasons for voting for the party, and stated that they had resonance.  
 
Table 2. Messages in Candidate’s Communication 
(All presented as a percentage of overall content) 
 
 
Annette Brooke 
Oliver Letwin 
Jim Knight 
Local Campaign (no 
connection to party policy) 
11% 
19% 
16% 
Personal Qualities and 
Background 
17% 
21% 
20% 
Personal political 
achievements 
32% 
31% 
32% 
Party Policy (manifesto) 
19% 
22% 
14% 
Party Leader (picture or 
reference) 
1% 
1% 
0% 
Attack on opponent 
7% 
6% 
5% 
Tactical Voting Message 
13% 
0% 
13% 
 
Locally, however, the messages had to focus more on the qualities of the 
individual candidate and their record for dealing with the day-to-day issues 
that voters raised. 
992 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
The candidates’ communication, for Brooke and Letwin a combination of 
leaflets and a letter, in Knight’s case leaflets and a DVD, all accentuated the 
same features; these are shown in Table 2. What is striking is the lack of 
reference to the party leader and de-prioritisation of party policy. All had an 
element of negativity, Brooke and Letwin against a party; Knight being more 
personal, reporting that the Sunday Times, 17 April, had named Matts ‘Twit 
of the Week’.  However the key message is not which party the candidates 
represent, as would perhaps be expected, but the candidates’ personal 
qualities and representative activities over their period as MP. 
This highlights the importance of permanent campaigning, firstly in order 
to have achievements to promote. Also, however, to promote an incumbent’s 
work using direct communication via regular newsletters which then prepare 
the voters for the more intense election campaign communication and 
provide what Knight described as permission to make contact. Candidates 
then expect to gain a warmer reception at public meetings, on the door-steps 
and during high visibility activities that exposed voters to the candidate. 
These activities are backed up by sustained locally focused leafleting, all of 
which were the dominant communication tools in these marginal seats. 
Backed by the resources of the Labour government, Knight also provided a 
DVD that focused exclusively on him ‘the product’ and the local causes he 
had promoted. This was circulated to Labour voters within the constituency 
as part of the get out the vote strategy. The campaign teams all agreed that an 
incumbent must promote a strong record, built through permanent 
campaigning, as this provides the candidate credibility; they will be trusted 
to defend the local post office, therefore voters will bring them their concerns 
as a matter of course; though one candidate commented that the list of causes 
could ‘spiral out of control’.  
The strategy detailed by local campaign teams contrasts with the national 
focus on the media; as one candidate argued ‘people read the bits in the 
newspapers they are interested in, but they will engage with someone on the 
doorstep on their terms’; in other words a door step or street meeting allows 
the candidate to both collect information and promote themselves, a 
combination of which gains the permission to contact the voter that national 
politics is unable to earn.  
The type of campaign communication, as well as the core message of each 
of these campaigns, negated the narrowcasting of simple messages, such as 
messages on health care to those who have registered an interest or fit a 
demographic. Instead communication was targeted as widely as possible by 
the local campaigners, the aim being to get the widest coverage of the 
constituency that was possible. There was a greater focus on core voters to 
some extent, particular areas where support and turnout was high; these 
were targeted specifically by Liberal Democrats in Dorset Mid and West with 
 
Local Campaign Management 
993 
 
‘Good Morning’ leaflets, delivered between 6-8am on election day to remind 
people to vote and how important each vote was. But few argued that the 
Voter Vault and Experian data, which provided a profile of constituents and 
calculated their propensity to support the party, had much practical utility 
locally. Canvassers were provided with sheets of voters scaled 1-9 by 
Conservatives, or in Labour’s case in order of probable voting behaviour, 
however few at the local level believed the data was wholly accurate. As 
Conservative strategist Antony Stanley observed, “voting is no longer 
determined by class… the only thing we can count on is that the working 
families, in small houses with white vans in the driveway are more socially 
conservative and are coming our way”. While appearing to defend the model 
of class-based voting, the point Stanley was making was that these people are 
not necessarily identified purely by their postcodes, and that the marketing 
software creates group identities that do not exist in reality; this point was 
made also by Prof Paul Whiteley commenting on the use of Experian 
(Mathieson 2005).   
Stanley argued that voter attitudes are mainly learned on the street. 
Profiling failed to differentiate between Conservatives and UKIP supporters; 
neither could it find disillusioned Labour voters. Software packages also had 
problems identifying waverers and so the strategy remained to canvass 
widely in order to avoid wasting resources later. More fundamentally, the 
promotion of the incumbent as hard working was universally regarded as a 
message every constituent should be exposed to. The national party 
campaigns did use these packages to target individual voters in the 
marginals, however on the ground the message to every voter highlighted 
the record of the incumbent, only on the doorsteps were messages tailored as 
discussion was drawn onto topics relevant to the voter being visited. This is 
the method of communication traditionally employed by Liberal Democrats, 
voters are contacted on the doorsteps, their allegiance and its strength 
recorded, but also the issues that concern them are noted. This allows for a 
more personalised mode of direct communication from the local party; only 
two pieces of direct mail came from central office, both of which were from 
Charles Kennedy simply detailing party policy. 
To summarise, interviews with the members of local campaign teams, and 
observation of the campaign, seem to suggest a rejection of the 
Mandelsonian, centralised, model of campaign management. While the 
national party campaign follows this format; across the 646 constituencies, 
and particularly in the marginal seats where the battle is toughest, the 
campaign strategists discuss professionalism in terms of appropriateness, 
which prioritises a different set of benchmarks. The first and most important 
is that the campaign is one that local voters will respond to, this means 
designing constituency specific campaign messages and styles; increasingly it 
994 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
seems that this builds upon a successful, permanent campaign and the record 
of the incumbent. Even challengers are argued to have to become 
constituency servants, provided they are selected early enough, in order to 
have a record; something that was of great importance to the campaign of 
Justine McGuinness the Liberal Democrat in Dorset West. Secondly, 
communication is highly interpersonal; whether it is face-to-face or using 
direct mail the message will be locally focused and will promote the service-
orientation of the candidate within the constituency.  This is argued to be the 
way to win, and given that all three retained their seats it would seem to be 
proven, however, neither party evidence nor academic study can offer real 
insights into whether such a strategy cuts any ice with the voters. 
A further important factor within the marginal constituencies, that the 
parties shrugged off but which gained a high level of media attention, is 
tactical voting. All the parties involved highlighted who the main combatants 
were and encouraged voters to focus on the straight choice; in Dorset Mid 
and West this was Conservative or Liberal Democrat, in Dorset South 
Conservative or Labour. The Liberal Democrats and Labour were happy to 
admit that their candidates in seats where they had little chance were 
encouraged not to campaign. Dorset West Labour candidate Dave Roberts 
was active in Jim Knight’s campaign in the constituency next-door 
throughout and little was heard from Labour’s Philip Murray in Dorset Mid. 
Only Graham Oakes the Liberal Democrat in Dorset South put up a fight. To 
aid the victory of non-Conservative candidates www.votedorset.net was 
created, a site dedicated to encourage vote swapping. This non party tactical 
voting campaign was spearheaded by former Labour activist and pop star 
Billy Bragg, the site asked Labour voters in Dorset Mid and West to find a 
‘voting valentine’ in Dorset South, a Liberal Democrat who would vote 
Labour. Only 132 voters registered with the website, and a cursory glance 
over the discussion board indicates that many of these were from outside of 
the three constituencies; however this may well have had an impact upon 
voting behaviour that is hard to measure. 43.5% (455 out of 966) of the 
questionnaire respondents agreed or strongly agreed that their vote was 
tactical; the question remains: were they convinced by the media campaign, 
party literature or the Bragg website? This research focuses on voter recall 
and interaction with the party communication; however some insights on 
this are drawn.  
 
Message Received and Understood? 
 
There are three questions posed through the analysis of the local 
campaigning in these marginal constituencies in 2005: is there evidence of an 
incumbency factor; does this encourage recall of communication; and 
 
Local Campaign Management 
995 
 
acceptance of the message. The questionnaire was designed to elicit the 
extent to which voters had noted the permanent campaigning activities, if 
they did recall communication and, given the argument that incumbents 
have permission to contact voters, would voters then recall communication 
from or about the incumbent more than they would from challengers after 
weighting for political loyalties. The questionnaire also measured the extent 
to which local factors mattered and if incumbents were seen as the ‘best 
representative of the area’ independent of other factors. This analysis will 
assess whether the model of local campaigning, as set out by the three parties 
in marginal seats, has any influence over voter perceptions of the incumbents 
and if any effect upon voting can be detected? 
Incumbency has long been argued to be a factor in UK politics (Cain et al. 
1987), however few have found evidence that it has any significant influence 
upon voting behaviour. The respondents, on the whole and independent of 
political bias, rated the incumbent’s service highly with a mean of 6.94 but a 
standard deviation of 2.979. More important, however, is the stronger 
association with voting behaviour, the data is displayed in Table 3. The data 
suggests there are strong and significant associations between voting and 
incumbency, the anomaly is the data from Dorset Mid, where a far higher 
proportion of constituents who voted Conservative also scored Brooke very 
highly for her service provision than was the case elsewhere.  
 
Table 3. Testing for the Incumbency Factor 
 
 
Incumbency Score 
(All) 
Incumbency Score 
among their voters 
Voting and 
Incumbency Score (r2) 
Dorset Mid  
Mean   8.1 
SD       2.1 
Mean   8.9 
SD       0.9 
.363* 
Dorset West  
Mean    6.08 
SD        3.2 
Mean    8.9 
SD        0.4 
.558* 
Dorset South  
Mean   6.9 
SD       3.01 
Mean     8.8 
SD         1.2 
.489* 
* significant at >.001 
 
Given the overall high score for incumbents, is it the case then that there is 
some form of permission awarded them, by constituents, to communicate to 
them during elections and are constituents then more likely to recall and 
respond positively to the communication. Respondents were asked if they 
recalled communication from the candidates, to rate out of ten the 
communication overall and to rate, also out of ten, the candidates on their 
presence, this data correlated with incumbency score is shown in Table 4; 
analysis is weighted to factor out party loyalty derived from those who 
agreed or strongly agreed to the voting behaviour question ‘I always vote for 
that party’.  
996 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Table 4. Voter Responses to Incumbents’ Communication 
 
 
Level of Recall‡ 
and association with 
incumbency (r2) 
Communication 
Score (mean) and 
association with 
incumbency (r2) 
Presence Score 
(mean) and 
association with 
incumbency (r2) 
Dorset Mid 
Recall     96.5% 
r2                  .307* 
Score     7.81 
r2             .423* 
Score    7.01 
r2          .495* 
Dorset West 
Recall     95.3% 
r2            .038 
Score     5.49 
r2           .607* 
Score     4.73 
r2           .492* 
Dorset South 
Recall     94.3% 
r2            .209** 
Score     6.24 
r2           .604* 
Score     6.93 
r2           .757* 
‡   The recall score amalgamates individual responses to questions asking if they recalled 
candidate’s leaflets as well as being visited by the candidate or one of the campaign team 
or saw the candidate in the media. To be included in the percentage each voter would have 
recalled at least two different forms of communication, in all cases one piece of 
communication was a leaflet, in Dorset South the DVD was classed as a leaflet. 
*    significant at >.01 
**  significant at >.05 
 
The data indicates that nearly all the voters recall having had communication 
from or with the incumbent; this is consistent with a strategy to reach as 
many voters in the constituency as possible. Statistical analysis shows that 
there is a strong association between recall of communication and awarding 
a high incumbency score; it would be wrong to suggest that this were causal, 
or make assumptions as to the direction of cause, however it can be inferred 
that the combination of the permanent campaign and the intensity of the 
communication leads voters to have a positive view of the incumbent and 
perhaps this also means they are more susceptible to their communication. 
The context of the Dorset West constituency makes the finding there less 
positive, the reason for this is the sharp division within the constituency 
between Dorchester town and the rural area. Dorchester is staunchly Liberal 
Democrat and voters in the area ‘almost see McGuinness as the MP anyway” 
(Focus Group, Dorset West, 15/6/05); therefore there are many who do not 
feel Letwin is as active in this town. In contrast the rural areas feel much 
better served and so award Letwin a higher score for both incumbency and 
presence during the campaign.  
To test the extent that the voters are more likely to recall and rate higher 
the communication of the incumbent above the challenger it is useful to run 
the same tests for the main contender, who in each case campaigned with as 
much vigour. The level of recall and high mean scores for the communication 
and presence are shown in Table 5. Consistent with the argument, 
incumbents have a far higher level of recall, and receive higher scores than 
challengers, even when weighted for party loyalty. The exception is in Dorset 
 
Local Campaign Management 
997 
 
West where a larger percentage of respondents found McGuinness was more 
active within Dorchester; thus suggesting that within this town Letwin lacks 
permission to contact voters while the Liberal Democrat challenger was 
welcomed, which was clearly evidenced in the focus groups where 
Dorchester voters were astonished at the perception of Letwin as a good 
incumbent advocated by voters living in the communities of Tolpuddle, 
Winterbourne Abbas and Bridport.  
 
Table 5. Challenger Recall  
 
 
Level of Recall 
 
Communication 
Score (mean) 
Presence Score 
(mean) 
Dorset Mid  
(Conservatives) 
Recall     76.5% 
 
Score     3.54 
 
Score    2.64 
 
Dorset West 
(Liberal Democrats) 
Recall     99% 
 
Score     6.93 
 
Score    6.7 
 
Dorset South 
(Conservatives) 
Recall     82% 
 
Score     3.31 
 
Score    3.81 
 
 
At this stage the data may suggest that there is likely to be some level of 
association between service provision and voting behaviour. This was tested 
for using a number of questions on the questionnaire, though only 
employing simple comparisons with the other candidates. Given that 
incumbency appears important then there should be some clear associations.  
Across the three constituencies the incumbent scored highest in two cases 
for being the candidate ‘who best understands you and your community’. 
95% of Dorset Mid voters said Brooke, 72% of Dorset South voters said 
Knight but only 41% of Dorset West voters said Letwin. Overwhelmingly 
respondents indicated that they did care about the quality of the candidate 
and seemed to suggest they voted for the candidate that was more likely to 
offer a good service; this is shown in Table 6. 
Voters were also asked to explain their voting behaviour in terms of 
candidate-related as well as national factors. One raft of questions required 
agreeing or disagreeing with statements such as those above (Table 6) a 
second set asked for responses on national factors influencing voting 
behaviour; such as ‘I voted for the representative of the party I wanted to see 
in government’ or ‘represented the best potential prime minister’ and asked 
voters to tick the candidate that possessed that quality independent of voting 
behaviour (see Table 7). The findings were interesting in themselves, 
however grouping together national factors and local factors one sees both 
factors are of equal importance to voters.  
 
 
998 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Table 6. The Importance of the Candidate Among Voters (in %) 
 
 
Not 
important 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
I voted for the best 
representative for me and 
my community 
 
6.5 
 
4 
 
11.8 
 
39.8 
 
36.3 
I voted for the candidate 
who best addressed my 
concerns 
 
10.8 
 
2.4 
 
10.5 
 
47.6 
 
27.2 
 
The findings here are mixed. In terms of voting, all but Dorset South, 
possibly because Knight was a representative of the governing party, local 
factors appear of more importance than national factors and in all cases the 
individual who was selected by the voters overwhelmingly earned 
recognition for their local credentials; be that potential or actual. However 
when selecting an MP national factors are also of great importance. There 
were strong, significant associations in all cases for national factors: support 
for the party, or best potential prime minister, or that the party had the best 
policy on one or more issues.  The associations between voting behaviour 
and the candidate’s qualities are far lower, suggesting that only the 
incumbent is judged on their local record, except in Dorset West where both 
Letwin and McGuinness had been involved in permanent campaigning and 
so had earned equal prominence across the constituency as a whole.  
 
Table 7. The Importance of National and Local Factors  
(all percentage of respondents stating very important or who award these qualities to the 
person they voted for) 
 
 
Importance of 
local factors on 
voting 
behaviour 
Importance of 
national factors 
on voting 
behaviour 
Local-related 
qualities awarded 
to candidate who 
earned vote 
National-related 
qualities awarded 
to candidate who 
earned vote 
Dorset 
Mid 
35.7 
28.7 
64.4 
79.7 
Dorset 
West 
33.3 
24.8 
65.7 
68.5 
Dorset 
South 
32.8 
33.6 
66.5 
97.4 
 
What is less tangible is whether the national qualities are used by 
respondents to justify a non-rational choice. In focus groups many argued 
that local factors mattered when voting Liberal Democrat, and in Dorset 
South when voting Labour due to the poor local perception of Conservative 
candidate Ed Matts after his forced apologies. However, in general, there 
 
Local Campaign Management 
999 
 
were mixed feelings about the importance of local factors; they would 
encourage non-voters to vote, persuade Labour loyalists to vote tactically for 
the anti-Conservative candidate and imbue a sense of being represented, but 
few argued that they voted on the candidate’s qualities alone as they felt that 
party policy was the most important factor. This may have been a feature of 
the natural unrepresentativeness of self-selecting focus groups, or suggest 
that while recognition for the strong local activities may be high it is actually 
an assessment of the national party and the perception that their policies are 
better for the area, making the candidate seem the best person for the job 
regardless of their individual ability. The problem with taking the focus 
group data on face value, as opposed to the quantitative data, was the 
predominance of the politically interested.  
An interesting group within the respondents were those who had 
changed their vote between 2001 and 20054; these offer some fascinating 
observations. On the whole Conservatives in Dorset South moved to Labour, 
while Dorchester Conservatives moved across to the Liberal Democrats.  
 
Table 8. Vote Switching and the Local Factor 
 
 
Local 
factors 
National 
Factors 
Incumbency 
score 
Awarded local 
credentials to 
candidate voted for 
Awarded national 
credentials to 
candidate voted for 
Association 
with 
switching  
(n = 92) 
 
 
.845* 
 
 
.035 
 
 
.625** 
 
 
.745* 
 
 
.234** 
*   significant at >.01 
** significant at >.05 
 
Labour voters in Dorset West and Mid moved overwhelmingly to the Liberal 
Democrats yet there were eighteen Dorset West voters in the rural areas that 
voted Conservative in 2005 having voted Liberal Democrat in 2001, 
indicating this was due to Letwin’s record as these were not tactical moves. 
Liberal Democrats in Dorset South turned to Labour. On the whole the 
switchers shifted for national reasons, they were voting tactically. However a 
minority, 8.9% of the overall sample, seem to have been motivated by the 
incumbency factor. By selecting those Dorset Mid Conservatives who shifted 
to support Brooke, their Liberal Democrat counterparts in Dorset West who 
voted for Letwin and the Conservatives that supported Knight in Dorset 
South we find that local factors overwhelmingly predominate. The results are 
displayed in Table 8. On the whole it is the local factors and high 
                                                     
4 Respondents were asked to record their voting behaviour for both general elections 
in order to detect shifts of allegiance. 
1000 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
incumbency score that show the strongest associations. Combining these 
three variables using regression analysis we find that 88% of the voting 
behaviour is accounted for here, so for this group it seems that local 
campaigning really does matter. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The data shows that in 2005 a new model of campaigning had evolved, one 
that centred on the local issues, promoted the record of the incumbent, or the 
challenger where possible, focused on face-to-face contact supported by 
leafleting and followed a relationship management model of communication 
as opposed to the marketing and public relations models ascribed to the 
national party campaigns. In terms of recognition, despite the equal strength 
of the campaigns, the incumbents earned greater recall, except within 
Dorchester, and they were recognised as having been good, local MPs. Thus 
the message is not only recalled but is accepted into the subconscious of the 
voters. Those suggesting that voting decisions are often ill-considered snap 
judgements, founded on peripheral knowledge, may take heart in the fact 
that one simple heuristic being employed is recognition of service, or the 
potential for service, when selecting an MP. 
However voting is far more complex. Local factors appear to be 
important, yet national factors are seen as most influential on voter 
behaviour; logical given that the votes locally decide the composition of the 
legislature. Yet for almost 9% of this sample, local factors are paramount. 
They switch their vote based on the strength of the incumbent’s record and 
perhaps accept their lack of ability to influence the national result. In this 
way they are able to influence one outcome as well as feel some satisfaction 
over the result. These 9% may appear trivial. However, provided they are 
representative, this indicates that almost 6,000 votes may be winnable 
through incumbency. Letwin’s increase in his majority was 1,047, Brooke’s 
5,098 and Knights’ 1,659 (increases in real votes of 2,637, 3,642 and 1,204 
respectively); none were able to capture 9% extra votes, however all three 
incumbents earned significant support for their service provision; 
significantly more than Butler allowed when arguing MPs were worth little 
more than 500 votes (Butler 1952, p. 75), suggesting there has been a shift in 
the importance of incumbency.  
But was incumbency the factor. Would they have earned a swing towards 
them had they not engaged in permanent campaigning, built themselves a 
strong local profile, and then campaigned on that record sidelining party 
political messages in favour of localised and focused relationship building; 
the data from questionnaires and focus groups suggest not. Voters liked their 
styles, when exposed to it, and thus some were more interested in listening 
 
Local Campaign Management 
1001 
 
to them. This suggests that the incumbent not only wins voters looking for 
local representation, but as the party representative can also be an effective 
advocate of party policy. Thus perhaps resources should be focused on the 
local level to a greater extent, and the permanent relationship building, as it 
seems to have clear potential to win votes.  
 
References 
 
Acton, Tom and Lilleker, Darren G. (2004), Listening to the Public: The influence 
of opinion polls on MPs, Paper presented at the 15th Elections Parties and 
Opinion Polls Annual Conference, Oxford, Sept 12 
Baines, Paul and Mortimore, Roger (2005), “Marginal Seat Picture offers 
Little Solace to Conservatives”, http://www.mori.co.uk/pubinfo/plb/ marginal-
seat-picture.shtml accessed 30 April 
Bannon, Declan (2003), “Relationship Marketing and the Political Process”, 
Paper presented at the Political Marketing Conference 2003, Sept., London 
Bartle, John and Griffiths, Dylan (Eds.), (2001), Political Communications 
Transformed: From Morrison to Mandelson, Basingstoke, Palgrave 
Blumler, Jay and Kavanagh, Denis (1999), “The Third Age of Political 
Communication: Influences and Features”, Political Communication, 16, (3), 
pp.209-230 
Butler, David E. (1952), The British General Election of 1951, London, 
Macmillan 
Cain, Bruce E., Ferejohn, John A. and Fiorina, Morris P. (1987), The Personal 
Vote: constituency service and electoral independence, Cambridge, MA, 
Harvard University Press 
Clarke, Harold, Sanders, David, Stewart, Marianne and Whiteley, Paul 
(2004), Political Choice in Britain, London, Oxford University Press 
Denver, David and Hands, Gordon (1997), Modern Constituency Electioneering: 
Local Campaigning in the 1992 General Election, London, Frank Cass 
Denver, David and Hands, Gordon (2001), “The Fall and Rise of 
Constituency Campaigning”, In: Bartle, John and Griffiths, Dylan (Eds.), 
Political Communications Transformed: From Morrison to Mandelson, 
Basingstoke, Palgrave 
Denver, David, Hands, Gordon and MacAllister, Iain (2003), “Constituency 
Marginality and Turnout in Britain Revisited”, In: Rallings, Colin, Scully, 
Roger, Tonge, Jon and Webb, Paul (Eds.), British Elections and Parties 
Review, 13, London, Frank Cass, pp.248-273 
Gabriel, Yiannis and Lang, Tim (1999), The Unmanageable Consumer: 
contemporary consumption and its fragmentation, London, Sage 
Gould, Philip (1997), The Unfinished Revolution: How the modernisers saved the 
Labour Party, London, Little, Brown and Co 
1002 
Darren G. Lilleker 
 
Hames, Tim (2005), “An election for a single nation but the choice of many 
Little Britains”, The Times, 7 May, p.60 
Holtz-Bacha, 
Christina 
(2002), 
“Professionalization 
of 
Political 
Communication: The Case of the 1998 SPD Campaign”, Journal of Political 
Marketing, 1, (4), pp.23-37 
Jackson, Nigel A. and Lilleker, Darren G. (2004), “Just Public relations or an 
Attempt at Interaction?: British MPs in the Press, on the Web and ‘In Your 
Face’’, European Journal of Communication 19, (4), pp.507-533 
Johnston, Ron and Pattie, Charles (2003), “Do Canvassing and Campaigning 
Work? Evidence from the 2001 General Election in England”, In: Rallings, 
Colin, Scully, Roger, Tonge, Jon and Webb, Paul (Eds.), British Elections 
and Parties Review, 13, London, Frank Cass, pp.248-273 
Jones, Nicholas (1996), Soundbites and Spindoctors: how politicians manipulate 
the media and vice versa, London, Orion 
Jones, Nicholas (2001a), The Control Freaks: How Labour gets Its Own Way, 
London, Politico’s 
Jones, Nicholas (2001b), Campaign 2001: An Election Diary, London, Politico’s 
Lees-Marshment, Jennifer (2001), Political Marketing and British Political 
Parties: The Party’s Just Begun, Manchester, Manchester University Press 
Lees-Marshment, Jennifer and Lilleker, Darren G. (2005), “Political Marketing 
in the UK”, In: Lilleker, Darren G. and Lees-Marshment, Jennifer (Eds.), 
Political Marketing: a Comparative Perspective, Manchester, Manchester 
University Press, pp.15-38 
Lilleker, Darren G. and Lees-Marshment, Jennifer, (2005), “Introduction: 
rethinking political party behaviour”, In: Lilleker, Darren G. and Lees-
Marshment, Jennifer, (Eds.), Political Marketing: a Comparative Perspective, 
Manchester, Manchester University Press, pp.1-14 
Lilleker, Darren G. and Negrine, Ralph (2002), “Professionalisation: Of What? 
Since When? By Whom?”, Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 7, 
(4), pp.98-103 
Lilleker, Darren G. and Negrine, Ralph (2003), “Not Big brand Names but 
Corner Shops: Marketing Politics to a Disengaged Electorate”, Journal of 
Political Marketing, 2, (1), pp.55-75 
Mair, Peter, Muller, Wolfgang G. and Plasser, Fritz (2004), Political Parties and 
Electoral Change, London, Sage 
Mancini, Paolo (1999), “New frontiers in political professionalism”, Political 
Communication, 16, pp.231-245 
Mathieson, Steven A. (2005), “Home in on votes”, The Guardian, 3 March  
Negrine, Ralph and Lilleker, Darren G. (2003), “The Rise of a Proactive Local 
Media strategy in British Political Communication: clear continuities and 
evolutionary change 1966-2001”, Journalism Studies, 4, (2), pp.199-212 
Negrine, 
Ralph 
and 
Papathanassopoulos, 
Stylianos 
(1996), 
“The 
 
Local Campaign Management 
1003 
 
Americanization of Political Communication: A Critique”, Harvard 
International Journal of Press/Politics, 1, (2), pp.45-63 
Norris, Pippa (2000), “Political Communications and Democratic Politics”, In: 
Bartle, John and Griffiths, Dylan (Eds.), (2001), Political Communications 
Transformed: 
From 
Morrison 
to 
Mandelson, 
Basingstoke, 
Palgrave 
Macmillan, pp.163-180 
Panebianco, Angelo (1988), Political Parties: organisation and power, London, 
Cambridge University Press 
Pattie, Charles J. and Johnston, Ron J. (2003), “Local battles in a national 
landslide: constituency campaigning at the 2001 British General Election”, 
Political Geography, 22, pp.381-414 
Plasser, Fritz and Plasser, Gunda (2002), Global Political Campaigning: A 
Worldwide Analysis of Campaign Professionals and Their Practices, New York, 
Praeger 
Sanders, Karen, Bale, Tim and Canel, Marie J. (1999), “Managing Sleaze: 
Prime Ministers and News Management in Conservative Britain and 
Socialist Spain”, European Journal of Communication, 14, (4), pp.461-486 
Smith, Jon, (2005), Election 2005, London, Politico’s 
Swanson, David L. and Mancini, Paolo (1996), Politics, Media and Modern 
Democracy: an international study of innovations in electoral campaigning and 
their consequences, London, Praeger 
Watt, Nicholas and Borger, Julian (2004), “Tories reveal secret weapon to 
target voters”, The Guardian, 9 October 
Wring, 
Dominic 
(1999), 
“The 
Marketing 
Colonisation 
of 
Political 
Campaigning”, In: Newman, B. (Ed), A Handbook of Political Marketing, 
London, Sage, pp.41-53 
Wring, Dominic (2004), The Politics of Marketing the Labour Party, London, 
Palgrave 
 
About the Author  
 
Dr Darren G. Lilleker is Senior Lecturer in political communication and 
research methods in the Media School, Bournemouth University. He has 
previously published on left-wing activism, political communication and 
political marketing in the UK and is co-editor of Political Marketing: a 
comparative perspective (Manchester University Press 2005) and The Political 
Marketing Election? (Manchester University Press 2006) and has authored Key 
Concepts in Political Communication (Sage 2006). He is Chair of the Political 
Marketing Group of the Political Studies Association and a fellow of the 
Centre for Public Communication Research.  
 
 
