Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
1 
The impact of social media appearances  
during election campaigns 
Completed Research Paper 
 
Julian Bühler 
ESCP Europe Business School Berlin 
jbuehler@escpeurope.eu 
Markus Bick 
ESCP Europe Business School Berlin 
mbick@escpeurope.eu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
With social media services gaining importance in recent years, political institutions are continuously incorporating this 
development especially during elective campaigns. In the present empirical study, we use the Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology (UTAUT) to conceptualize the level of acceptance of social media appearances. To identify 
differences when dealing with politically motivated social media appearances, seven hypotheses are derived and tested. We 
identified the seven most important social media services in Germany and globally and used an adaptive conjoint-analysis to 
extract 33 major functions of these services. Controlled by four moderators, multiple analyses of variances expose significant 
differences referring to effects of UTAUT determinants and thereby towards Behavioral Intention as well as Use Behavior. 
As elections took place in the USA or will be held in the near future in Germany, these results can be the basis to conduct 
additional transnational comparative studies in a further step. 
Keywords 
Social media services, social networks, politics, elections, election campaigns, Web 2.0. 
INTRODUCTION 
Internet-based communication platforms were used extensively by Senator Barack Obama during his elective campaign in 
preparation of the 55th United States presidential election in 2008. For the first time these kind of interactive channels were 
examined by researchers as they were recognized as a tool of major influence which could have a significant impact on the 
final vote (O’Mera, 2008; Smith, 2009). One year later, the presidential election served as a model for German parties and 
politicians as they heavily increased the use of social media during the elections for the Bundestag. However, due to their 
lack of experience with managing these communication channels appropriately, German parties could not benefit as much as 
their American counterparts (von Pape and Quandt, 2010). 
On the one hand they were not able to integrate this new approach into their overall offline-strategy and on the other hand 
they could not properly handle social media to develop its full potential. Retrospectively, it seems to be obvious that no 
political protagonist capitalized on an effective social media strategy as measured by typical elements such as dynamic 
processes, interaction or direct contact and communication (O’Reilly, 2005). Furthermore, German campaigns had 
concentrated on adopting US-American approaches. Meanwhile, Karlsen (2010) transferred nine significant differences of 
campaigning styles in the US and Europe to the social media world which Plasser and Plasser (2002) had identified in offline 
surroundings earlier. 
The main objective of this study is to analyze which elements and functions of social media services are favored and how 
they should be applied to develop their full potential in political contexts. We use the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use 
of Technology (UTAUT) as a theoretical concept to identify essential insights which can increase the level of acceptance of 
politically motivated social media appearances (Venkatesh et al., 2003). At this point, our study concentrates on Germany but 
globally-known social media services (e.g. Facebook) are integrated to make this study applicable to future intercultural 
research designs.  
Our methodology is based upon two key elements to test seven hypotheses which refer to the influence of the UTAUT 
moderators towards its determinants. First, we identify the most important social media services and conduct an adaptive 
conjoint-analysis with students as a main target group to extract the relevance of certain functions offered by these services. 
Second, our empirical approach provides several one-way analyses of variances to measure the level of significance of all 
four UTAUT determinants. By doing this, we set the basis to apply UTAUT and to answer the following research question: 
Can social media appearances play a significant role during election campaigns? 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
2 
THEORETICAL CONCEPTUALIZATION 
This section contains a brief definition of our understanding of social media services and appearances, our underlying 
theoretical model (setting be the basis for further intercultural research projects) and the hypotheses we are going to test. 
Definition of social media services 
The term social media service is often linked to social networks or even more frequently to Web 2.0 (Chiang et al., 2009). 
However, according to Lim and Palacios-Marques (2011) “no unified definition about Web 2.0 exists”, neither for social 
media services nor for networks. Thus, a useful exposure to these kinds of services is to focus on general characteristics like 
participation or collaboration. For this study, politically motivated appearances within social media areas are understood as 
an overall strategy using multiple social media services to achieve “a more intense and therefore more democratic form of 
dialogue and exchange of information between politicians, political parties and institutions, on the one hand, and citizens, on 
the other” (Hooghe and Teepe, 2007; Coleman, 2005). Even though the tenor of this definition can be easily associated with 
the principles of younger parties in Germany like the aspiring Pirate Party, this study explicitly operates above party line 
because nowadays most of the major parties are already engaging in this field. 
Different types of acceptance models 
In general, acceptance models are used to describe relations between specific key factors and their influence towards positive 
or negative affections of a certain environment. Within the field of information systems these models focus on technology 
acceptance in particular. A widely known example is the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and its modification 
(TAM2) which both concentrate on the effects of Perceived Usefulness and Perceived ease of Use on the potential and actual 
usage (Davis, 1989; Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). 
In addition to these predominantly activity-orientated elements, the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) by Fishbein and 
Ajzen takes a different type into account which arises from a deeper psychological level (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980; Fishbein 
and Ajzen, 1975). Especially the constructs Attitude toward the behavior and opinions of referent others (Subjective norm) 
contain important aspects relating to our research question because of the characteristics of social media services mentioned 
above. TAM and TRA as well as other acceptance models put their specific focus on a different behavioral level but neither 
orientation should be ignored in this research field. Both the individual behavior relating to social media (represented in 
TAM) and possible group effects such as pressure, forcing a user to adopt a technological system (measured with TRA), must 
be examined.  
UTAUT as an integrated approach to measure technology acceptance 
UTAUT is a model to integrate common approaches like TRA or TAM and others within a single, unified concept 
(Venkatesh et al., 2003). Table 1 provides an overview of all behavioral models that form the basis of UTAUT: 
 
Model name 
Developer 
Years 
Acronym 
Theory of Reasoned Action 
Fishbein, Ajzen 
1975, ‘80 
TRA 
Technology Acceptance Model 
Davis 
1986, ‘89 
TAM 
Motivational Model 
Davis, Bagozzi, Warshaw 
1992 
MM 
Theory of Planned Behavior 
Ajzen 
1985 
TPB 
Combined TAM and TPB 
Taylor, Todd 
1995 
C-TAM-TPB 
Innovation Diffusion Theory 
Moore, Benbasat 
1991 
IDT 
Social Cognitive Theory 
Compeau, Higgins 
1995 
SCT 
Table 1. Behavioral and Acceptance Models that constitute UTAUT 
 
Because these models (Table 1) only discuss acceptance from different individual, cognitive or interpersonal perspectives, we 
decided to build this study on UTAUT as a unified theory. As it connects individual advantages of all concepts, it is able to 
measure the level of acceptance of certain technologies more adequately (Venkatesh et al., 2003). This is important for our 
goals as we need a theoretical basis that offers a holistic framework to measure many different types of influencing factors. 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
3 
All of them are relevant when it comes to the (non-) usage of social media services and especially the frequently used TAM 
disregards social and group effects which seem to be very important in this research field. For example, Bagozzi (2007) 
demonstrates the relevance of cultural impacts based on this model. 
 
Figure 1. Research model 
UTAUT consists of four major determinants – Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social Influence and Facilitating 
Conditions – that can directly affect the Use Behavior or indirectly through Behavioral Intention. For our study, we 
understand these two dependent constructs as the intention to interact or the actual interaction with a political social media 
appearance. Furthermore, each determinant is influenced by at least two of the following key moderators: Gender, Age, 
Experience and Voluntariness of Use. The entire model including our underlying hypotheses is presented in Figure 1. 
Derivation of hypotheses referring to the determinants of UTAUT 
By applying UTAUT to our research question, the four determinants (Figure 1) can explain why users behave or intent to 
behave on social media platforms in a certain way. These first insights can assist political institutions to adjust their 
appearances. To address these effects and measure them adequately later on, we state the following seven hypotheses: 
The first determinant Performance Expectancy reflects the level of confidence a user has in a technology or system. Being 
“the strongest predictor of intention”, Venkatesh et al. (2003) emphasize its importance within UTAUT. As factors 
moderating the effect of performance expectations towards the Behavioral Intention, UTAUT refers to Gender and Age. With 
respect to Gender, several studies claim that men and women use the internet in different manners. Setting the focus on 
Germany, a study on behalf of the two public television stations reveals a gap of 15% between both genders which clearly 
favors men with respect to the range of internet-based applications they use (ARD/ZDF, 2011). This assumption leads us to 
the first hypothesis within the political environment: 
H1a: Male individuals expect a wider scope of social media functions used by political campaigns than women.  
Another important UTAUT moderator that affects Performance Expectancy is Age. According to the Federal Statistical 
Office in Germany, nearly 40% of the population is older than 50 years (DESTATIS, 2009). However, only a quarter of them 
use the Internet on a regular basis – the others cannot be reached by political social media appearances a priori – whereas we 
can assume a nearly 100% penetration within the group of people younger than 50 years (ARD/ZDF, 2011). Following these 
numbers, we hypothesize with regard to our research question: 
H1b: The older an individual is, the less he or she finds merit in politically driven social media appearances. 
The second determinant Effort Expectancy combines elements of TAM and IDT (Perceived ease of use) as well as MPCU 
(Complexity) and puts them together to describe the effort a user must invest to handle a technology (Venkatesh et al., 2003). 
In terms of our research topic, we have to measure the effort one has to put in to gain access to a social media service and the 
necessary technological requirements (e.g. equipment or devices). Level of Experience is one of the key moderators for this 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
4 
determinant; as stated before, it is not linked to Age, though. We assume that younger people are more experienced with the 
usage of social media services and must invest less effort to capitalize on them. 
H2a: A higher level of experience - especially of younger users - leads to less effort one has to invest in order to gain access 
to politically driven social media appearances. 
In order to be capable of handling the moderator Experience in a next step, we had to operationalize it at first. Even though it 
is not the only reliable indicator, we assume a positive correlation between a rising level of experience and frequent internet 
usage over time. However, while UTAUT proposes gender differences as it is easier for men to gain access to the internet in 
general, we refuse this argumentation with regard to the usage of social media services. Nowadays, there is no natural hurdle 
for female users to take part in social media services apart from their own choice to ignore them. Therefore we expect that: 
H2b: Gender differences will not have a significant impact on the effort users have to invest to gain access to politically 
driven social media appearances. 
The third UTAUT determinant, Social Influence, is important in this research field because social media services are 
predominantly interactive and offer new communication channels (Walther et al., 2008). With many relatives and friends 
participating in certain social media services, we assume that the surroundings of a user play an important role if he or she 
considers enrolling in a service, too (Ecclestone and Griseri, 2008). Especially unskilled users tend to bow to peer pressure, 
so we expect a significant disparity with regard to the technological experience. We assume our political setting to foster this 
effect even more because it’s an area with opinions and convictions being highly dominant: 
H3a: Inexperienced social media users tend to be more influenced by others than experienced users, with politically 
motivated social media appearances to foster this effect. 
The moderator Voluntariness of Use can be utilized to differentiate between users who spend their time with a social media 
service voluntarily and those who have to use it for business reasons. If a user has to integrate social media services into his 
daily working routines, e.g. to work together with other colleagues in a collaborative intranet environment, we assume that he 
or she tends to be less influenced by social relations in private ambience: 
H3b: The lower the level of voluntariness of a user is, the lower is his receptiveness for political social media appearances. 
The last determinant, Facilitating Conditions, was derived by Venkatesh et al. (2003) from multiple acceptance models 
UTAUT is based on (e.g. Perceived behavioral con-trol of TPB and C-TAM-TPB, Facilitating Conditions of MCPU or 
Compatibility of IDT). As many aspects in this area are already covered by Performance Expectancy, the authors describe a 
direct influence of Facilitating Conditions towards the actual behavior on a social media platform but not towards the 
intention to potentially use it. In this study, we determine the level of political interest within this category, with Age being 
the key moderator. Predominantly, younger people show a lack of interest for political topics which means that parties are 
potentially struggling to attract this user group (Walther et al., 2008). 
H4: Younger users with less interest in political topics are tougher to address with politically motivated social media 
appearances in contrast to older ones. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This section explains our research methodology consisting of a split questionnaire with a) an adaptive conjoint-analysis and 
b) rating questions on Likert scales as well as several Analyses of Variances (ANOVAs). 
General survey settings 
To test our hypotheses with several ANOVAs, we developed a questionnaire with two major sections:  
The first section is used for an adaptive conjoint-analysis to examine Performance Expectancy in detail. Thereby we cope 
with the dominant role of this determinant which we explained earlier. We conduct an adaptive conjoint-analysis to identify 
those functions of social media services that play the most important role for the users and, therefore, meet their performance 
expectations best. The second section of the questionnaire is built up of questions relating to the other determinants mostly 
using Likert-scales. Furthermore, demographic user data was surveyed at the end to handle the four UTAUT moderators. 
Although this setting is vulnerable to a sample bias, we focused on students as our main target group to test the basic 
functionality of our model (Bortz and Döring, 2006). Members of this group are not only very familiar with social media 
services in general as they grew up with them but they are also of high political interest due to their level of education 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
5 
(Pempek et al., 2009; Hillygus, 2005). However, it will be necessary to widen the range of our target group within further 
(intercultural) studies. 
We decided to use an online survey as it is necessary to access computer-assistance when applying an adaptive form of a 
conjoint-analysis. This is in line with our research question as you need access to the internet in order to use social media 
services. The link to our questionnaire was distributed through various communication channels including online forums, 
appropriate groups within social networks sites (e.g. groups containing political discussions) and Twitter, but also via offline 
invitations at several universities and viral announcements to avoid data bias.  
Adaptive conjoint-analysis to measure performance expectations of social media services 
To deal with the UTAUT determinant Performance Expectancy, we had to figure out which features of social media services 
are most appreciated by its users. A conjoint-analysis is a suitable method to split higher-ranking feature categories (groups) 
into several attributes (functions) which receive an individual value by users’ decision (Johnson, 1987; Green and Rao, 
1971). While a user has to categorize every possible feature combination in a full-profile approach (e.g. choice based), a 
trade-off approach is supported by computer calculations to reduce the necessary amount of comparisons (Johnson, 1987). 
We applied the adaptive conjoint-analysis to avoid the “possibility of information overload” (Green and Srinivasan, 1978), 
one can expect because of the huge diversity of social media services and its functions. 
In a first step, we had to identify the main social media services that were used in Germany compared to the worldwide 
rankings. Referring to traffic ranks and page views as well as the ALEXA ranking (2010), we arranged a top ten list of 
different service types like social media networks, blogging services, picture- and video-sharing services (Table 2). 
 
Germany 
Global 
Rank 
Website 
Rank 
Website 
3 
Facebook (www.facebook.com) 
2 
Facebook (www.facebook.com) 
4 
YouTube (www.youtube.com) 
3 
YouTube (www.youtube.com) 
11 
Twitter (www.twitter.com) 
11 
Twitter (www.twitter.com) 
15 
StudiVZ (www.studivz.de) 
19 
MySpace (ww.myspace.com) 
16 
XING (www.xing.de) 
30 
LinkedIn (ww.linkedin.com) 
20 
Wer-kennt-wen (www.wer-kennt-wen.de/) 
31 
Flickr (www.flickr.com) 
21 
MeinVZ (www.meinvz.net) 
64 
Orkut (www.orkut.com) 
24 
MySpace (ww.myspace.com) 
68 
hi5 (www.hi5.com) 
31 
SchuelerVZ (www.schuelervz.net) 
154 
Tagged (www.tagged.com) 
39 
Flickr (www.flickr.com) 
229 
XING (www.xing.de) 
Table 2. Top ten ranking of social media services in Germany and worldwide 
We decided to vary the social media service type and, therefore, to analyze the features of the highest ranked social networks 
(Facebook, MySpace, Xing, LinkedIn and StudiVZ), video-platform (YouTube) and blogging-service (Twitter). According to 
Wattal et al. (2010) this approach is reasonable because diverse services can trigger different “properties and capabilities” 
resulting in different use behaviors. Each service was then examined individually and a list of 33 main functions could be 
created by matching the results of every service. We tested various other services from the ALEXA ranking as well but could 
not identify any additional main functions. Therefore, we rearranged all functions and spread them to eight groups which are 
the basis of the adaptive conjoint-analysis (Table 3). 
At the beginning of our questionnaire, the respondents had to classify the relevance of each function within a certain group 
based on their personal preferences; the opportunity to suspend a function was not allowed as all of them should be judged 
(Herrmann et al., 2003). All functions were measured using a nine-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (absolutely irrelevant) to 
9 (absolutely necessary). In a second step the participants were asked to rank each group relative to one another as they had to 
specify the distance between the most and least important function of a group. The adaptive conjoint processor of the survey 
tool then calculates two virtual social media services which contain different functions of the same groups; at the beginning 
of this decompositional part, functions of two groups, in later stages three and four groups are presented (Green et al., 1991). 
The participant had to compare and weigh these fictitious services while up to 30 new ones are generated based on his or her 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
6 
replies. Finally, the users’ ratings were calibrated and we received individual, calibrated values for every function and the 
relative importance of each group. 
 
Group 
Functions 
 
Group 
Functions 
Personal Information 
 
Picture Galleries 
Status Message 
 
Picture-to-User Linkage 
Events & Meetings 
 
Picture Information 
Profile 
Guestbook & Pinboard 
 
Picture 
Picture Annotation 
Video Categorisation 
 
Applications 
Channel Subscription 
 
Games 
Playlists 
 
Links 
Video Annotation 
 
Chats 
Rating 
 
Premium Accounts 
Video 
RSS-Feeds (Video) 
 
Extras 
Mobile Access 
Profile Restrictions 
 
Blog Post 
Status Message 
 
RSS Feeds (Blogs) 
Events & Meetings 
 
Blog Subscription 
Data Privacy 
Guestbook & Pinboard 
 
Blog 
Blog Annotation 
User-to-User Communication 
 
Discussion Forum 
Profile Linkage 
 
Collaboration 
Diary Management 
User Link-Up 
Groups 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Classification of the 33 main functions into eight superordinate groups 
 
User behaviour on social media services 
While the adaptive conjoint-analysis was used to deal with Performance Expectancy, the three remaining UTAUT 
determinants were investigated with direct questions in the second part of the survey. The participants had to state for each of 
the seven examined social media services whether they use it or not. Depending on the answers, it was their task to categorize 
the degree of difficulty on a Likert scale regarding the registration process and the overall handling of a certain service. This 
section of the questionnaire is used to explain the determinant Effort Expectancy. Similarly, Social Influence and Facilitating 
Conditions were measured. On the one hand the responders had to answer questions referring to the use of social media 
service within their social surroundings. On the other hand they had to state if there are specific reasons why they use social 
media services (e.g. job-related purposes).  
RESULTS 
In the following section of this study, we present the most relevant functions of social media services as results of the 
adaptive conjoint-analysis and then test our hypotheses with several ANOVAs. 
Selection and categorization of participants 
After a period of six weeks, our questionnaire was completely and correctly filled out by 173 participants with an average 
response time of 24.5 minutes. We checked their data reliability with t-tests using the coefficient of determination (R-
squared) we received from the conjoint-analysis results. Therefore, this study is based on a final sample of n=134 as we had 
to refuse 39 participants whose response behavior was not consistent on a 1% level of significance. This meets the 
recommendation of Martens’ scale regarding the coefficient of determination (Martens, 2003). 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
7 
As the setting of UTAUT defines, we used the four key moderators within this study to cluster the participants into groups. 
The UTAUT determinant Gender is explained by the demographical user data and its general trend correlates with the 
literature (ARD/ZDF, 2001): 48 participants (35%) are female and 86 (64%) are male. Since we chose students as our target 
group for this test, the age pattern ranges between 18 and 30 years in general with only a few participants being older than 40 
years. We divided all participants into four groups using quartile rankings in order to deal with the UTAUT determinant Age. 
Level of Experience and Voluntariness of Use were classified through multiple survey questions. We distributed points for a 
frequent and periodic use of the examined social media services, analogue to our six-point measuring scale ranging from 6 
points for a frequent and regular use to 1 point if a participant uses a service only occasionally. Voluntariness was measured 
with several questions related to a participants’ use structure. The less the participant is forced to use social media services 
(e.g. for business reasons), the more points he or she received. Again, both overall results were divided into four groups 
based on the quartiles. To avoid equal scores in different quartiles, we slightly varied the number of participants within the 
groups. The final classification is presented in Table 4: 
 
Group Name  
Criteria 
N = 134 
Male 
86 
Gender 
Female 
48 
Age ≤ 21 years 
36 
22 years ≤ Age ≤ 24 years 
33 
25 years ≤ Age ≤ 27 years 
38 
Age 
28 years ≤ Age 
27 
Experience Points (EP) ≤ 16 
28 
17 ≤ EP ≤ 21 
38 
22 ≤ EP ≤ 26 
36 
Experience 
27 ≤ EP 
32 
Voluntariness Points (VP) ≤ 5 
32 
6 ≤ VP ≤ 8 
37 
VP = 9 
27 
Voluntariness of Use 
10 ≤ VP 
38 
Table 4. Classification of participants based on the four UTAUT moderators 
 
Adaptive conjoint-analysis 
The calibrated values for every function we received from the adaptive conjoint-analysis were normalized and scaled in order 
to facilitate inter-group comparisons as all functions are arranged within the same scope. Furthermore, this allows us to match 
the relative relevance of each group as well (Johnson, 1987). Table 5 shows the calibrated, normalized and scaled values of 
the functions and the relative importance of each group. 
Our results illustrate a major importance of the groups Profile (16.23%) and Extras (17.57%) with Personal Information and 
Chats being most relevant for the social media users. In addition, there is a considerable difference between the two groups 
Pictures (12.05%) and Videos (10.32%), even though they contain similar types of functions. The creation of in-depth 
content such as Blog Posts (7.95), Video Categorization (6.24) or Discussion Forums (8.55) is relevant, independent of its 
respective group importance. Within the group Data Privacy (10.55%), Profile Restrictions obtain the highest value of 7.67. 
 
 
 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
8 
Group (relative importance) 
Function  
Value (scaled & normalized) 
Personal Information 
14.16 
Status Message 
  6.05 
Events & Meetings 
  6.36 
Profile (16.23%) 
Guestbook & Pinboard 
  5.87 
Picture Galleries 
  8.57 
Picture-to-User Linkage 
  5.76 
Picture Information 
  5.86 
Picture (12.05%) 
Picture Annotation 
  4.89 
Video Categorization 
  6.24 
Channel Subscription 
  4.10 
Playlists 
  5.52 
Video Annotation 
  6.26 
Rating 
  6.85 
Video (10.32%) 
RSS-Feeds (Video) 
  3.73 
User-to-User Communication 
11.83 
Profile Linkage 
  5.39 
User Link-Up (12.61%) 
Groups 
  2.6 
Blog Post 
  7.95 
RSS Feeds (Blogs) 
  3.16 
Blog Subscription 
  4.37 
Blog (10.29%) 
Blog Annotation 
  6.37 
Discussion Forum 
  8.55 
Collaboration (10.36%) 
Diary Management 
  2.73 
Applications 
  9.84 
Games 
  6.23 
Links 
11.75 
Chats 
13.75 
Premium Accounts 
  2.30 
Extras (17.57%) 
Mobile Access 
  9.92 
Profile Restrictions 
  7.67 
Profile Linkage Prohibition 
  4.48 
Contact Restrictions 
  4.11 
User Blacklist 
  5.54 
Data Privacy (10.55%) 
Personal Information 
14.16 
Table 5. Results of the adaptive conjoint-analysis 
ANOVAs to test our hypotheses 
To test our hypotheses within the UTAUT model, we conducted several one-way analyses of variances (ANOVA). We first 
applied the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to check whether our data is normally distributed and proved homoscedasticity with 
Levene’s test to meet the requirements of this method. The first ANOVA was used to analyze if gender differences lead to a 
divergent scope of social media functions (Hypothesis 1a). We took Gender as the independent variable and the individual 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
9 
relative importance of a certain group from the conjoint-analysis as the dependent variable. On the 5% - level of significance, 
our results show that differences occur within the groups User Link-Up and on the 10% - level in the groups Profile and 
Video. We repeated multiple ANOVAs for the UTAUT moderator Age to measure its influence on Performance Expectancy 
as well as for the remaining determinants and its respective affecting moderators. Table 6 provides an overview of our results 
including significance values.  
Group 
 
Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square 
Sig. 
Between groups 
  341.845 
   1 
  341.845 
0.032 
Within groups 
3403.700 
  32 
    25.786 
 
User Link-Up 
 
Total 
3745.545 
133 
 
 
Between groups 
  135.978 
    1 
   135.978 
0.06 
Within groups 
    37.713 
  32 
     37.713 
 
Profile 
 
Total 
5114.126 
133 
 
 
Between groups 
    52.808 
    1 
     52.808 
0.064 
Within groups 
2000.725 
  32 
     15.157 
 
Video 
Total 
2053.533 
133 
 
 
Table 6. One-way ANOVA of the UTAUT determinant Performance Expectancy  
(selected results referring to the moderator Gender) 
Group 
 
Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square 
Sig. 
Between groups 
3241.939 
   3 
1080.646 
0.035 
Within groups 
2481.404 
  30 
     19.088 
 
Experience 
 
Total 
5723.343 
133 
 
 
Between groups 
3431.547 
   3 
1143.849 
0.041 
Within groups 
2291.796 
  30 
     17.629 
 
Voluntariness 
of Use 
 
Total 
5723.343 
133 
 
 
Table 7. One-way ANOVA of the UTAUT determinant Social Influence 
Group 
 
Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square 
Sig. 
Between groups 
  37.605 
   3 
12.535 
0.049 
Within groups 
606.492 
  30 
  4.665 
 
Age 
Total 
644.097 
133 
 
 
Table 8. One-way ANOVA of the UTAUT determinant Facilitating Conditions 
On the 95%-confidence interval, we verified further significant differences related to the UTAUT determinant Social 
Influence with respect to the level of Experience as well as Voluntariness of Use (Table 7). Furthermore, the results show that 
Age moderates the Facilitating Conditions, which means political interest in this study (Table 8). Hypothesis H1a is 
supported because we could prove some significant gender differences with regard to major social media functions. 
Comparisons show that male participants, on average, rated group values and related functions higher than female (e.g. the 
value of the most relevant group Profile is rated with an average score of 16.99 by male and only 14.88 by female). H1b is 
rejected as there is no argument for Age being a hurdle to access (politically motivated) social media appearances. Both Age 
and Experience do not have an impact on the expected effort a user has to invest in order use a social media service; thus H2a 
has to be refused but H2b is confirmed. We could identify a significant effect of the user’s experience towards Social 
Influence as well (H3a is confirmed). A deeper analysis of our results made clear that the first quartile, representing the 
inexperienced users, is affected by social surrounding twice as much as the others. We also found the same effect for users 
who deal with social media services for business reasons in contrast to the rest, supporting H3b. In the end, our results 
confirm that a majority of younger users is less interested in political topics than older ones (H4). 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
10 
DISCUSSION 
Findings 
In this study, we analyze which functions of social media services have an impact on users’ acceptance and therefore – with 
regard to UTAUT – influence their Behavioral Intention to use such services. We applied an adaptive conjoint-analysis to 
identify these functions and to explain the UTAUT determinant Performance Expectancy. Referring to the original research 
question and the aim of this study, our results demonstrate that social media appearances can play a significant role during 
election campaigns. From what we found, political campaigns in Germany should focus on individual profiles including 
personal information of their top candidates and interactive elements at first. Especially user-to-user communication (e.g. 
personal message functions) and multi-user chats should be adopted to keep direct contact with potential voters as well as 
cross references to appearances on other services via links. This means, in terms of UTAUT, that Behavioral Intention of a 
user to interact with political motivated social media appearances rises if these functions are implemented properly. In 
contrast, multimedia elements seem to be less important with pictures outranking videos. 
Our results also show that there is no need for political actors to pay much attention to possible excess supply: Too many 
adopted functions do not raise Effort Expectancy and have no impact on Behavioral Intention. In addition, political 
appearances should consider addressing both experienced social media users and those who use social media services for 
business reasons. As we proved before, theses users act upon their environment distinctively but are rarely influenced by 
others. That is why political actors can possibly gain attraction to a complete community behind these essential users. Finally, 
UTAUT describes a direct effect of the Facilitating Conditions – in this study political interest – towards the actual Use 
Behavior. But according to our results, younger users do not normally draw the attention to political social media 
appearances even though they use these services for other reasons. In order to win over younger and already active users, 
popular functions – like those we identified in the conjoint-analysis – should be adopted to influence their actual behavior by 
changing their intention first. 
Limitations and Further Research 
To test our model, we used students as our target group. This decision could have affected our results because it entails 
certain influencing factors like academic background or financial status. To prevent these factors from biasing our results we 
plan to stretch this study to a sample that represents a cross-section of the population. Another limitation is the cluster of 
functions we examined as social media services offer new opportunities in quick succession. Especially Facebook has taken 
over a dominant position as the leading social network site in recent years and extends its functional spectrum on a regular 
basis. Therefore, it is important to fall back to abstract functional groups to be capable of integrating upcoming functions to 
our research model more easily. 
As stated in the introduction, making use of social media services for political reasons was originally established within the 
United States of America. Krasnova et al. (2012) summarize some cultural differences between countries that are based on 
varying moral concepts and which lead to individual patterns of use. According to the use of UTAUT, we developed a 
research model which is also suitable to identify intercultural differences. In a further study, we plan to compare the United 
States of America (looking back to their election in 2012) and Germany (with an election to come in September, 2013). 
These country-specific results could give political actors individual advice on how to arrange an optimal social media 
appearance in order to attain the biggest effects.  
REFERENCES 
1. Ajzen, I. and Fishbein, M. (1980) Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs. 
2. Alexa: The top 500 sites on the web, http://www.alexa.com/topsites. 
3. ARD/ZDF-Onlinestudie (2011) Entwicklung der Onlinenutzung in Deutschland 1997 bis 2011, http://www.ard-zdf-
onlinestudie.de/index.php?id=onlinenutzungprozen0. 
4. Bagozzi, R.P. (2007) The legacy of the technology acceptance model and a proposal for a paradigm shift, Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, 8, 4, 244–254. 
5. Chiang, I., Huang, C.-Y., and Huang, C.-W. (2009) Characterizing web user’s degree of Web 2.0-ness, Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60, 7, 1349-1357. 
6. Bortz, J. and Döring, N. (2006) Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation für Human- und Sozialwissenschaftler. Springer, 
Berlin. 
Bühler et al. 
 
The impact of social media services on elections 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013. 
11 
7. Coleman, S. (2005) New mediation and direct representation: reconceptualizing representation in the digital age, New 
Media Society 7, 2, 177-198. 
8. Davis, F.D. (1989): Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology, MIS 
Quarterly, 13, 3, 319–340. 
9. DESTATIS (2009), https://www.destatis.de/bevoelkerungspyramide. 
10. Eccleston, D and Griseri, L (2009) How does Web 2.0 stretch traditional influencing patterns?, International Journal of 
Market Research, 50, 5, 591-616. 
11. Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975) Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research, 
Addison-Wesley, Reading. 
12. Green, P., Krieger, A.M., and Agarwal, M.K. (1991) Adaptive Conjoint Analysis: Some Caveats and Suggestions. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 27, 2, 215-222. 
13. Green, P.E. and Rao, V.R. (1971) Conjoint Measurement for Quantifying Judgemental Data, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 8, 3, 355-363. 
14. Green, P.E. and Srinivasan, V. (1978) Conjoint Analysis and in Consumer Research: Issues and Outlook, The Journal of 
Consumer Research, 5, 2, 103-123. 
15. Herrmann, A., Schmidt-Gallas, A., and Huber, F. (2003) Adaptive Conjoint Analysis: Understanding the Methodology 
and Assessing Reliability and Validity, in Gustafsson, A., Herrmann, A., and Huber, F. (Eds.) Conjoint Measurement - 
Methods and Applications, Springer, Berlin, 305-330. 
16. Hillygus, D. S. (2005) THE MISSING LINK: Exploring the Relationship Between Higher Education and Political 
Engagement, Political Behavior, 27, 1, 25-47. 
17. Hooghe, M. and Teepe, W. (2007) Party profiles on the web: an analysis of the logfiles of non-partisan interactive 
political internet sites in the 2003 and 2004 election campaigns in Belgium, New Media Society 9, 6, 965-985. 
18. Johnson, R.M. (1987) Adaptive Conjoint Analysis, Sawtooth Software Conference on Perceptual Mapping, Conjoint 
Analysis, and Computer Interviewing, 253-265. 
19. Krasnova, H., Veltri, N.F., and Günther, O. (2012) Die Rolle der Kultur in der Selbstoffenbarung und Privatsphäre in 
sozialen Onlinenetzwerken, Wirtschaftsinformatik, 54, 3, 123-134. 
20. Lim, S. and Palacios-Marques (2011) Culture and purpose of Web 2.0 service adoption: a study in the USA, Korea and 
Spain, The Service Industries Journal, 31, 1, 123-131. 
21. Martens, J. (2003) Statistische Datenanalyse mit SPSS für Windows. Oldenbourg, München. 
22. O’Mera, T. (2008) US election 2008: From the web to the Oval Office, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/ 
3359011/US-election-2008-From-the-web-to-the-Oval-Office.html. 
23. O'Reilly, T. (2005) What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Genera-tion of Software, 
http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html. 
24. Pempek, T., Yermolayeva, Y., and Calvert, S. (2009) College students' social networking experiences on Facebook, 
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 30, 3 , 227-238. 
25. Smith, A. (2009): The Internet's Role in Campaign 2008, http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/ 
2009/the_Internets_Role_in_Campaign_2008.pdf. 
26. Venkatesh, V. and Davis, F.D. (2000) A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal 
field studies, Management Science, 46, 2, 186–204. 
27. Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis G. B., and Davis, F. D. (2003) User Acceptance of Information Technology: 
Toward a Unified View, MIS Quarterly, 28, 3, 425-478. 
28. Von Pape, T. and Quandt, T. (2010) Wen erreicht der Wahlkampf 2.0? Media Perspektiven, 9, 390-398. 
29. Walther, J., Van Der Heide, B., Kim S., Westerman, D., and Tom Tong, S. (2008) The Role of Friends’ Appearance and 
Behavior on Evaluations of Individuals on Facebook: Are We Known by the Company We Keep?, Human 
Communication Research, 34, 28-49. 
30. Wattal S., Schuff D., Mandviwalla, M, and Williams C (2010) Web 2.0 and Politics: The 2008 U.S presidential election 
and an e-politics research agenda, MIS Quarterly, 34, 4, 669-688. 
